---
layout: post
title:  "Place 101 at Hashcode 2017"
date:   2017-03-16 19:21:33 +0100
categories: blog
author: Tom Nick
excerpt: Hashcode is an international programming competetion where teams with a maximum number of 4 people have to solve a complex problem in under 4 hours. We reached place 101 in the 2017 competition, this is a short summary of our experience.
---

A friend of mine wrote me if I know this google Competition that would take place in some weeks and send me a link with it: [https://hashcode.withgoogle.com/](https://hashcode.withgoogle.com/).
I didn't, but was intrigued by it.
Hashcode works by giving each team over the world at the same time access to a problem. Along with the problem are mulitple input datasets.
The task is to do find a solution for the given data and write the solution to an output file, which then can be uploaded to be scored.
The better the solution, the higher the score. The 50 best teams are invited to Paris and a second round will take place.

One can check the problems which were asked to be solved in the previous years, every problem had a similiar structure:

1. It's always some kind of NP-hard problem were the given dataset is far too big to actually find the optimal solution
2. The input datasets are really similiar in the structure, a parser from a previous year can easily be used as a starting point
3. Same with the output data format

The biggest difficulty is actually to create a working solution in under 3 hours and 45 minutes. Ah yes, it also needs to be fast, the input sets are not that small.

Because we don't solve these kinds of problems often and we thought it's a good idea to test how we can work together, we met up one day
and tried to solve one of the previous years. We agreed on using python for this, becasue everyone of us was quite good in it and a scripting language can be written quickly. After 4 hours of intense group work, the problem was not fully solved - so a complete failure in the eyes of Hashcode, but we learned some important things during this testphase.

* Everyone should make sure to have the same version of the programming language and working environment
* Don't think so long about the problem, try to find a solution as quick as possible and iterate over the current solution.
* Have one person write the code and commit it. Merge conflicts etc are way worse than typing speed, it really helps though when multiple people look at the screen and validate the code.
* Think about the performance of the current solution, big datasets might not work.
* Create an outline of the data-structures you want to use, especially if you use indices or references etc. This is super important! We agreed on using python-classes, because we read this solution of a past problem afterwards and thought it looks pretty neat: [https://github.com/flashcode/google-hashcode-2016](https://github.com/flashcode/google-hashcode-2016).

One of our group also solved the testproblem that is released every year. Its main function is to give the groups a taste of what they should expect and to show how the submission / scoring / file uploading works.
We used this solution to create a skeleton with an input-parser, output-writer and a basic main method.

On the day of the competition, we all met up again. We coded at my place, because we also used it for the test and it worked quite well.
We met one hour early and made sure everything is set up correct. One of us was actually remote participating, so we checked that speaking with him worked smoothly.

When the countdown for the release of the problem was at 0, we just reloaded the page thinking it would appear there. But actually a new menu-entry is created.
30 seconds lost, damnit! :D

Everyone read the problem quietly, after that we made an outline about the relationship of the data. You can probably find the problem at hashcode, if not [here is the document](/assets/documents/hashcode2017_streaming_videos.pdf).
I started to code the input parser and the needed classes at the same time. My group collegues were thinking about how to solve it.
They quickly come up with a good method, we wanted to normalize the data, and sort the servers with some heuristic.

We could work together really well, so much better as in the testphase. We still thought to complex and when we were finished coding up the first solution, we noticed that for the biggest dataset, the code is far to slow.
Only one hour was left at the moment, so we quickly searched for the culprit and found it, the server sorting heurstic was super slow. We commented it out and tried it out again. It was still super slow, but fast enough to get a solution for every dataset in under 20 minutes. At this point, we had no clue if our exporter or the solution did work at all, we only tested with the example.
The moment a score appeared after we uploaded, we were super releaved. Our score was quite high! During the competition there is a dashboard were teams can see how good they currently are, it's frozen though after 2:45 hours and our solution would have been place 43 on this!

During the time we were still actively searching for performance-improvements, mostly adding a cache to some functions, which helped amazingly.
The code actually improved so much in performance, that we could use our heuristic. Only 5 minutes before the competition was over, we could upload our solution with the applied heuristic...and it actually didn't do so much.
So in the end, we achieved place 101 and were all super happy about it, but no paris for us this year. But we again learned some important things, which we keep in mind for the next time:

* Try to implement a simple solution first and really think hard about your heuristic!
* Add caching! Maybe write a decorator beforehand to easily cached the results of functions.
* Use maybe a fast language to solve the problem. Performance is quite crucial in the end and something like Java/Cpp would have helped us probably there.

Our group Name was TU_Dudes and the code can be seen at [https://github.com/TN1ck/hashcode-2017](https://github.com/TN1ck/hashcode-2017). It's quite the mess though, so be warned.
